---
title: "A Heuristic Baseline Method for Metadata Extraction from Scanned Electronic Theses and Dissertations"
collection: publications
permalink: /publications/2020-08-02-jcdl-1
excerpt: 'This is a paper for the poster which has been accepted to ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries 2020 and recieved **Best Poster Award Honorable Mention**.'
date: 2020-08-02
venue: 'ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries in 2020'
paperurl: 'https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3383583.3398590'
citation: 'Muntabir Hasan Choudhury, Jian Wu, William A. Ingram, and Edward A. Fox. 2020.
A Heuristic Baseline Method for Metadata Extraction from Scanned Electronic Theses and Dissertations. In JCDL ’20: Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE Joint Conference
on Digital Libraries in 2020, Virtual Event, China, August 1-5, 2020. ACM, 515–516.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3383583.3398590'
---
Extracting metadata from scholarly papers is an important text mining problem. Widely used open-source tools such as GROBID are designed for born-digital scholarly papers but often fail for scanned documents, such as Electronic Theses and Dissertations (ETDs). Here we present a preliminary baseline work with a heuristic model to extract metadata from the cover pages of scanned ETDs. The process started with converting scanned pages into images and then text files by applying OCR tools. Then a series of carefully designed regular expressions for each field is applied, capturing patterns for seven metadata fields: titles, authors, years, degrees, academic programs, institutions, and advisors. The method is evaluated on a ground truth dataset comprised of rectified metadata provided by the Virginia Tech and MIT libraries. Our heuristic method achieves an accuracy of up to 97% on the fields of the ETD text files. Our method poses a strong baseline for machine learning based methods. To our best knowledge, this is the first work attempting to extract metadata from non-born-digital ETDs.

[Download paper here](https://opening-etds.github.io/files/poster-ps316-002.pdf)

Recommended citation: Choudhury, Muntabir Hasan and Wu, Jian and Ingram, William A. and Fox, Edward A.. "A Heuristic Baseline Method for Metadata Extraction from Scanned Electronic Theses and Dissertations" <i>Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries in 2020</i>.