---
title: "ScanBank: A Benchmark Dataset for Figure Extraction from Scanned Electronic Theses and Dissertations"
collection: publications
permalink: /publications/2021-09-29-1
excerpt: 'We focus on electronic theses and dissertations (ETDs), aiming to
improve access and expand their utility, since more than 6 million
are publicly available, and they constitute an important corpus to …'
date: 2021-09-29
venue: 'ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries in 2021'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1109/JCDL52503.2021.00030'
citation: 'Sampanna Yashwant Kahu, William A. Ingram, Jian Wu, Edward A. Fox. ScanBank: A Benchmark Dataset for Figure Extraction from Scanned Electronic Theses and Dissertations. In <em>Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries in 2021</em>.'
---
We focus on electronic theses and dissertations (ETDs), aiming to
improve access and expand their utility, since more than 6 million
are publicly available, and they constitute an important corpus to
aid research and education across disciplines. The corpus is growing
as new born-digital documents are included, and since millions of
older theses and dissertations have been converted to digital form to
be disseminated electronically in institutional repositories. In ETDs,
as with other scholarly works, figures and tables can communicate
a large amount of information in a concise way. Although methods
have been proposed for extracting figures and tables from borndigital PDFs, they do not work well with scanned ETDs. Considering
this problem, our assessment of state-of-the-art figure extraction
systems is that the reason they do not function well on scanned
PDFs is that they have only been trained on born-digital documents.
To address this limitation, we present ScanBank, a new dataset
containing 10 thousand scanned page images, manually labeled by
humans as to the presence of the 3.3 thousand figures or tables found
therein. We use this dataset to train a deep neural network model
based on YOLOv5 to accurately extract figures and tables from
scanned ETDs. We pose and answer important research questions
aimed at finding better methods for figure extraction from scanned
documents. One of those concerns the value for training, of data
augmentation techniques applied to born-digital documents which
are used to train models better suited for figure extraction from
scanned documents. To the best of our knowledge, ScanBank is
the first manually annotated dataset for figure and table extraction
for scanned ETDs. A YOLOv5-based model, trained on ScanBank,
outperforms existing comparable open-source and freely available
baseline methods by a considerable margin.  
  
Download the ScanBank dataset:    
Sampanna Kahu, William A. Ingram, Edward A. Fox, and Jian Wu. 2021. The
ScanBank Dataset. [https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4663578](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4663578)
